Synthetic Data Generation for Machine Failure Prediction
This repository contains the code and resources for a project focused on using synthetic data to improve the performance of a machine failure prediction model. The project addresses the common challenge of class imbalance in predictive maintenance datasets by augmenting the rare "failure" class with synthetically generated data.

🚀 Project Overview
The primary goal of this project is to demonstrate the effectiveness of synthetic data generation in enhancing the accuracy of machine failure prediction. The workflow involves:

Analyzing and preprocessing a real-world machine sensor dataset.

Generating synthetic data for the minority (failure) class using the Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) library.

Training and comparing two XGBoost classifiers: one on the original, imbalanced data and another on the augmented, balanced data.

Visualizing the results in an interactive Streamlit dashboard.

The results show a significant improvement in the model's ability to predict failures, with the recall for the failure class increasing from 68% to 89%.

✨ Key Features
Data Cleaning and EDA: Comprehensive exploratory data analysis and preprocessing of the machine failure dataset.

Synthetic Data Generation: Implementation of the GaussianCopulaSynthesizer from SDV to create a balanced training set.

Comparative Model Training: Training and evaluation of two XGBoost models to provide a clear comparison of the impact of data augmentation.

Interactive Dashboard: A user-friendly Streamlit application to visualize the project's findings.

🛠️ Technologies Used
Python: The core programming language for the project.

Data Science Libraries: Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, and Scikit-learn.

Machine Learning: XGBoost for the classification model.

Synthetic Data: Synthetic Data Vault (SDV) for data augmentation.

Web Framework: Streamlit for the interactive dashboard.

🚀 Getting Started
Prerequisites
Python 3.9+

pip

Installation
Clone the repository:

git clone https://github.com/Xema7/GNCIPL-Week-6-Project.git

Navigate to the project directory:

cd GNCIPL-Week-6-Project

Install the required dependencies:

pip install -r requirements.txt

Running the Project
To run the Streamlit dashboard:

streamlit run app.py

To explore the data analysis and model training process, you can run the Jupyter Notebook:

jupyter notebook "Machine failure synthetic data generation.ipynb"

📊 Results
The use of synthetic data resulted in a significant improvement in the model's performance, particularly in its ability to correctly identify machine failures.

Metric      Original Data Model    Augmented Data Model

Accuracy          83%                    91%
Failure Recall    68%                    89%

This demonstrates that synthetic data generation is a powerful technique for addressing class imbalance in predictive maintenance.
